Interview with Dr. Laura Summers, visiting
fellow at Sri Lanka University, Bangkok,
Thailand. Question one. Do you feel that the Khmer
Rouge should be involved in a coalition
government? Why?
Let me begin to answer this question by saying
something about how I understand the position of
those who oppose having the Khmer Rouge in a
coalition government. I think most of the...
campaign against Khmer Rouge involvement in the
coalition. is motivated by or informed by some
Western notions of justice or morality. I have
friends, and I'm sure you have friends, who say
things like, they're responsible for so much
killing, they don't deserve to be in power, or it
would be immoral for them to be put back in power
because it was for example unthinkable or immoral
that the fascists in Germany should be put back
into power after they were defeated in the war well
i want to stress that
the arguments that you hear about this tend to
issue out of western experience and western
values and they represent a projection of certain
democratic ideas of representation
And while I don't reject those values, and of
course we support those values, I want to suggest
to you that these arguments are unrealistic.
They're unrealistic if you look at the problem of a
coalition government within the framework of
Cambodian politics. so now let me answer the
question that's the introduction but my answer to
the question is that of course the Khmer Rouge must
be involved in the coalition government and I say
this for two reasons I say of course they must be
involved because of certain political and that
includes military realities on the ground And the
second reason I say they must be involved is, and I
want to be very careful about how I say this, they
must be involved because in some sense I would
argue they deserve to be involved. And I say they
deserve to be involved from the standpoint of what
has been happening inside Cambodian
nationalism. and when you look at Khmer Rouge from
that standpoint you can see that they still have
some support not as much as they had in the early 70s
and maybe more than they deserve in quotation
marks But the simple historical fact of the matter
is that they are recognized by some Cambodians as
the leading nationalist force, as a group of
people who still by and large represent the
interests of poor country people, poor peasants,
and as people who in standing up against the
Vietnamese invasion have in some sense
vindicated themselves although I think nobody
has forgotten about the suffering and the
killings from the 1970s that would be pretty
impossible because the scale was large OK, but let
me sum up by saying They really must be involved in
the coalition because that's the price, in some
sense, for peace. Le Premier Rouge still have the
largest, most disciplined, most coherent army
and political movement whatever we think of it and
certainly it's not a movement or party that many
foreigners would join whatever we think of it they
have political power on the ground And as you know
in political science, we're talking about
conflict resolution, we're talking about
settlement of disputes. This is a process which
involves compromise amongst those groups which
have power of one sort or another. either military
power as in the case of Khmer Rouge royal and
culturalist power in the case of Sihanouk whose
army isn't so impressive but Sihanouk himself is
widely recognized as being essential to a
coalition because monarchy is central to the
sense of stability and well-being in Cambodian
society so Sihanouk has a form of power which we can
label social and cultural power, as well as
political power. Monarchy is the fulcrum and has
always been the center of Khmer politics. It's
probably less the center of Khmer politics now
than it was 20 or 30 years ago. But again, it's still
important. Sihanouk represents a kind of power
which must be taken into account in a settlement.
And similarly, the KPNLF must be involved in the
settlement. The KPNLF involves a lot of middle
class, urban people, people with technical
skills, former high civil servants, former
teachers, the best and the brightest, if you like,
of Cambodians. they don't have much support in the
countryside peasants don't understand that
party and that movement very much but
nevertheless if you're going to have a government
that can really govern a government that can
pursue development policies you've got to have
engineers you've got to have accountants you've
got to have statisticians you've got to have
bankers financiers and businessmen and those are
the KPM people they must be included in a coalition
as well also and this is not unimportant they're
the people who speak the best to foreigners.
They're the people who have been educated abroad.
They're the people who can provide an important
bridge between Cambodian politics and the
politics of the rest of the world. And let me just
finish by saying that the Hun Sen Heng Sum Rin Party
must, of course, be included in the coalition,
too. All four parties have to be included in the
coalition. and I say this because they have
succeeded with a lot of Vietnamese and Soviet help
in putting together a new state administration
not a very strong one but in some sense a reasonably
effective one in administrative terms I don't
think that the Hang Sam Rin Hun Sen party is very
strong politically and that's because if you ask
the question who has power and what kind of power
they have the answer to those questions in the case
of the Hang Sam Rin Hun Sen people is they have
vietnamese military power behind them they're
the base of that administration the base of that
communist party is the vietnamese army right
they've had 10 years to try to build it into
something more and something different and there
really isn't a great deal of evidence to suggest
that they've made much progress Nevertheless,
the administration functions a bit the hospitals
are functioning, the schools are functioning
you've got a lot of people drawing salaries from
the ministries and there's a framework there and
there's a party with very low morale to which most
of these civil servants have rallied they join it
because it's associated with getting jobs
there's a framework there of a sort of
administrative power or state power which has to
be taken into account in a settlement and in the
formation of let me stress an interim coalition
government when people talk about coalition
government now they're talking about two
different kinds of coalitions firstly they're
talking about some form of armistice or ceasefire
that can be arranged in the near future alongside
the creation of an interim political authority
the term authority was used by the Paris
conference because the term government has
become so controversial so the CGDK wants to
defend its legal position as the only worldwide
recognized legal government and the Hun Sen
people still want to claim that their government
ought to be recognized so the politics of this is
being worked on internationally by more and more
people speaking in terms of the formation of an
interim coalition authority which would oversee
an armistice along with some sort of
international control mechanism and which would
be the Cambodian component of some sort of
international control mechanism which would
arrange elections in which all parties could
participate and which would presumably produce
an elected coalition government which would be a
proper legally constituted government formed as
a result of an act of self-determination on the
part of all Cambodian voters maybe that's enough
on that question
question two have the Vietnamese pulled out of
Cambodia
sub question a why won't they let the UN verify
their withdrawal and question sub question b will
they come back if the guerrilla forces get too
close to Phnom Penh
Well, these are straightforward questions, I'll
take them in order Yes,
the Vietnamese have pulled out of Khenpo Chia in
one particular sense The Vietnamese have pulled
out their organized combat battalions they have
turned full responsibility for battlefield
fighting over to the Heng San Ren army to put this in
another way so in that sense in that specific
military sense the Vietnamese army has pulled out
Kampuchea but politically speaking Vietnam has
not pulled out of Campuchia, not at all. Not at all,
and there should be no confusion about this. The
Vietnamese have admitted they have left an
advisory corps behind. There have been reliable
reports that there are five Vietnamese
consulates, so-called, strategically placed
around the country to oversee, to supervise the
fighting. So there's a large advisory, military
advisory structure there. and there is
undoubtedly still a core of Vietnamese advisors
attached to the Heng Sam Rin Communist Party
political bureau and central committee to
continue to advise them about political matters
about propaganda about what to say this week or
tomorrow or what have you there's no doubt about it
and politically too Vietnam has not pulled out of
Kampuchea in the following sense From the
beginning, the invasion, the replacement of the
Pol Pot government by a government of Vietnam's
own choosing, was part of a broad political and
social and economic and historical
strategy or development on the part of the
Vietnamese Communist Party and the Vietnamese
revolution. the
developmental outlook goes something like this.
Khenpochiya allows to form, in some sense, an
essential part of Indochina, if I can use the old
colonial term, in economic terms, because the
French began the process of economic
modernization in that part of Southeast Asia. by
coordinating the economies of those former
French territories. Saigon, as it was known then,
was the economic capital of Indochina. Hanoi was
the political capital. The Governor General of
France was based in Hanoi, and he oversaw
political, economic, and social developments in
all five territories of Indochina from Hanoi. So
from those times Laos and Cambodia were two
provinces if you like of Indochina which was
centered in Vietnam Now for some of the old
generation of Vietnamese Communist Party this
formative colonial experience which was 90 years
long effectively in the case of Cambodia in
economic materialist terms remember they're
serious Marxists in economic materialist terms
this determined historically that the
development economically and historically of
all the territories here would be integrated for
all times and in in modern market terms it makes
some sense this argument Vietnam's a very densely
populated too heavily populated country there's
not enough land to feed all of the Vietnamese
Vietnam technologically speaking is fairly
advanced highly urbanized lots of factories very
well educated population but the country lacks
raw materials for those factories Laos is rich in
minerals and timber and lots of raw materials
which are necessary in Vietnam to keep the
industries going Campuchia is rich in land, rich
in food and during the French colonial period
Campuchian food was used to feed the people in Goch
in China at the same time that the French invested
in industries and rubber plantations there so
there's a long momentum if you like behind
Vietnamese nationalism and Vietnamese
communism which leads a lot of the leadership in
the party to see Laos and Campuchia as absolutely
vital to their national security and their
national security in economic terms as well as in
military terms the Vietnamese will often say
things like we have been invaded from the sea so
many times in the last 10 centuries and we have been
invaded from the West by the Thais incidentally on
occasion through Cambodia through Laos you know
so many times and they can recite all the wars and
the names of the military commanders and the kings
who were involved and so it it is a part of
Vietnamese nationalism and Vietnamese
communism that these security considerations of
these economic considerations make them at the
very least extremely conscious of the importance
of having sympathetic governments in Laos and
Cambodia at a minimum the governments have to be
sympathetic and for some Vietnamese communists
and nationalists it goes further than that there
is an expectation that those governments must be
allies of Vietnam that they must cooperate fully
with the Vietnamese in economic development and
in military security
matters that in fact the whole of former French
Indochina must be regarded historically and in
practical policy terms as one solidarity block
the Vietnamese to use this language which is
inspired by Brezhnev's old limited sovereignty
doctrine which was developed in Eastern Europe
and the Vietnamese look at Eastern Europe and the
relationship between the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe and they draw parallels between
themselves and Laos and Cambridgeshire and so
they formulate these theoretical arguments and
this language of an Indo-Chinese solidarity bloc
which they used up until about 85 and then they
dropped it on the basis of their Marxist
theorizing and their historical analysis. But
more to the point of your question, they formulate
real policies on the basis of this theory and on the
basis of these historical conditions and so in the
very broadest sense this is why they invaded
Cambodia this is why they toppled the Pol Pot
government and put their own government in power
and set up a new communist party set up a new
communist army which would be loyal to their own
and allied with their own and set up a new state a
state of an entirely new character there's never
been a socialist state in Cambodia before like
this one Paul Park of course had hardly any central
government at all so this is the first time you have
the kind of full apparatus state apparatus in
Cambodia. I guess maybe to go back to the first
question, it's this apparatus which has somehow
to be taken into account now when people talk about
an interim political authority or a
post-election coalition government. well I
think I've answered your second question already
second sub-question will they come back if the
guerrilla forces get too close to Phnom Penh of
course they will of course they will there's no
doubt about it because one politically I'm saying
they never left you know it's a trick if you like
they pull out the troops so you know journalists
can go take pictures and say ah they're gone you
know Pilger can put in his film shots of the
Vietnamese withdrawing but that conveys the
wrong sort of political message militarily yes,
they've made a show of pulling out politically no
they have militarily pulled out so that
politically they can stand firm
and that brings me to the final sub-question it's
because they are standing from because
politically they've not given up their basic
enterprise but they don't want the UN in there they
don't want their withdrawal verified because of
course it can't be if they have the UN in they're in
trouble but to cover up for this they're using all
sorts of excuses and pretexts about the UN having
been biased over the last 10 years because the
Vietnamese have never accepted that their
invasion is in violation of the UN Charter and it
certainly is, without a doubt the Vietnamese have
never accepted that their invasion is in any sense
in international law illegal and of course it's
illegal but the Vietnamese talk about
proletarian internationalism they talk just
like the American government used to
incidentally about being invited in by by an
indigenous revolutionary force because they
pretend that the Heng Sam Rin Hun Sen Party arose
out of an indigenous civil war with the pop-up
forces they ignore that they brought all these
people out of vietnam and out of vietnamese
prisons in fact and put them they claim that there
was an indigenous uprising which they were asked
to support and in the name of pro-italian
internationalism they supported it and their
argument is that the people have spoken they've
spoken out against paul pott they supported this
indigenous uprising and therefore government
and party are genuine governments because they
are people's democracies because there's a
genuine people's revolutionary party there This
is the significance of the names that were given to
the People's Republic of Kampuchea and to the
Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party of Aung
San Suu Kyi. So they won't let the UN come in to
verify because the UN hasn't recognized the
so-called legal government from their point of
view and now at the Paris conference or in speeches
Nguyen Quoc Tac, the Vietnamese foreign minister
denounces the UN all the time because it is
prejudiced and biased and claims the UN will not be
an objective and fair observer of either a
ceasefire or the Vietnamese withdrawal or any
other form of international control and
supervision. That's a pretext. And there's a
serious debate here about the legality of
everything.
Question three. What effect will the recent
semi-recognition given by the UK and others have
on negotiations? I like the way you put this,
semi-recognition. It was in the paper again today
that it did not recognize and had not changed the
policy.
I think semi-recognition is too strong here and I
think the British position might be a little
different from everybody else's so let me as a
British academic speak to the British situation
first There have been some particular problems in
Britain in the last six or eight months. Problems
within the Foreign Office linked to cabinet
instability in Britain itself. and some problems
linked to relations with Vietnam cabinet
instability I can deal with very quickly the
Thatcher regime's regime the Thatcher
government I should call it it is a sort of regime
Thatcher is in a certain amount of political
difficulty at the moment. Economic policy isn't
working out too well. She's isolated in Europe and
the opinion polls show that she's not as super
popular as she used to be. In fact, she's a little
bit like Reagan. Her popularity ratings are
usually, her personal popularity ratings have
usually been a little bit better than the
support ratings for her policies. but in any case
the problems internally have led to a couple of
major cabinet reshuffles and the foreign
ministry has suffered as I point out in this little
discussion paper Britain has had three foreign
ministers in the last four months and in the
British system this represents a certain amount
of disorganization Geoffrey Howe had been
foreign minister for a long time and very familiar
with Cambodian affairs very sharp on the
Cambodian matters but he was sacked for all
intents and purposes in July during the cabinet
reshuffle and replaced by John Major from the
treasury John Major is a specialist on economic
matters and doesn't have much experience in
foreign affairs Nevertheless, he was an able
person, but you just can't put somebody in that job
and expect them to be on top of things overnight.
And then John Major was moved out of the Foreign
Office into the Chancellor of the Exchequer's job
when Nigel Lawson abruptly resigned from that
important job in October. So British foreign
policy has had no strong hand at the helm for many
months and this coincides with a real crisis in
Hong Kong involving the Vietnamese boat people
Britain has agreed, has promised China, that is
the PRC that all of the Vietnamese refugees in Hong
Kong will be out by 1997 and there are now over
50,000 of these people and they're living in
appalling conditions really they're
incarcerated they're living in prison
conditions which they shouldn't have to endure
but space problems in Hong Kong are just generally
horrific and in fact a lot of these people
apparently do not qualify for refugee status in
accordance to international law even though they
are afraid to go back to Vietnam and don't have a
very good life there. In any case, for reasons that
you and I will probably never fully know about, the
British government decided some months ago, this
happened before I left Britain, they decided
effectively really in June that they were going to
forcibly deport these people from Hong Kong and
there then arose a problem with how to get the
Vietnamese government to accept them to get the
Vietnamese to help Britain out of its dilemma in
Hong Kong and its treaty commitments to China so
there have been quiet negotiations with Vietnam
And the Vietnamese cause have been looking for
some quid pro quo. And Cambodia always comes up in
these discussions. And Britain, without
breaking ranks with the European community and
the US, has always said that they will provide aid
and will resume trade with Vietnam as soon as
they're out of Cambodia. the Vietnamese say well
we're pulling on our troops at the end of September
that's the time isn't it so in a sense the
Vietnamese have been pushing Britain and maybe
Britain before the other European countries for
some positive reciprocal response to the
withdrawal and in some measure I see the British
government making this small gesture in response
to Vietnamese military withdrawals but Britain
is not going to recognize the Phnom Penh
government and I'm sure they told Vietnam not
Britain is prepared to extend some recognition to
Vietnam for having withdrawn militarily, is
prepared to extend some recognition to the Hun Sen
administration, acknowledging in some measure
that it must be part of some settlement, it's not
going to be permanently kept in the cold and
isolated in Western strategic thinking. and so
the sending of a British diplomat to Phnom Penh to
talk with British aid agencies in Phnom Penh but
not to anybody in that administration is a halfway
gesture it is in no sense recognition and in fact
the way the British have done it is to reconfirm
that Britain, along with most of the countries of
the world still does not recognize the legality of
that government imposed by a foreign invasion and
comprised of people who were handpicked by a
foreign government and
a foreign party For the rest of the countries
alluded to here by reference to others I don't know
really what to say because nobody else is gone very
far. the US press has given Hun Sen some really
quite extraordinary recognition lately but the
US government hasn't budged a bit on the
recognition question and I wouldn't expect them
to frankly
the US is strongly behind the UN position on the
question of recognition
France has never recognized either the CGDK or the
Phnom Penh government. France has tried to play a
neutral role tried to play a mediating role as a
former colonial power, and it continues to do so
today. This was one of the reasons the Paris
Conference was held in Paris rather than
elsewhere. And as far as I'm aware, the French have
not budged from their strictly neutral position.
They have a CGDK diplomatic mission in Paris. They
allow diplomatic missions to come from Phnom
Penh. They have lines to both sides, if you like.
They've always had their aid agencies in Phnom
Penh. Madame Mitterrand has a private aid agency,
which has always worked in Phnom Penh. French
policy hasn't changed at all in recent months.
What about the Australian? the Australian,
there's been a lot of noise about the Australian
policy and the ambassador here in Bangkok is
clearly more sympathetic towards Phnom Penh than
some people in the Australian foreign ministry
and his position is really not always in keeping
with the position of the Australian government
and he has recently been rebuked for some of his
statements here in Bangkok Australia's policy is
absolutely clear their policy about recognising
states and recognising governments is slightly
unusual within world legal terms they do not
recognise governments, they recognise states so
they recognise that there is an independent state
of Cambodia but legal conditions are such that
Australia does not officially know I'm putting
quotation marks around know where the government
of this state of Cambodia is so they do not
recognize Phnom Penh they do not recognize the
CGDK and officially they have told the Hun Sen
government that they will not treat with Phnom
Penh in the normal international diplomatic
matter they cannot trade with phnom penh they
cannot receive phnom penh delegations as legally
recognized delegations in australia and they
similarly similarly they cannot do this with cgdk
and they will not do it for either government until
the legal position of one or the other is
normalized and then Australia will recognize and
Australia will trade I've recently received a
paper from the Australian Foreign Ministry in
which it is clearly stated that Australia will not
resume bilateral aid to Cambodia a state it
recognizes until there is an internationally
recognized political authority there and
they're speaking in terms of an interim political
authority as soon as there is some beginning of a
series of steps toward the settlement and an
interim political authority is established
under the auspices of the Paris conference
Australia is prepared to resume aid everyone will
resume aid then Australia has also repeatedly
made it clear that while it's interested in trade
with Indochina and normalizing relations with
all of Indochina that its relations with the ASEAN
countries and its trade with the ASEAN countries
is infinitely more important and Australia has
repeatedly said it will not take the lead on
Cambodia and on the Himalaya work with the ASEAN
countries and cooperate with the ASEAN countries
and will not enter into any relationship with
either Vietnam or Cambodia, which will
jeopardize its relationships with the ASEAN
countries? Well, I don't think even more needs to
be said about that question.